[WIP] Add an AI Guideline for OpenCloud plus minor adjustments in README (#29)
opencloud-eu/.github: profile/AI_GUIDELINE.md

# AI Contributions

> AI usage is causing challenges for all open source projects, so for OpenCloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI usage is causing challenges for all open source projects, and thus also for OpenCloud.
```

> This document will set up guidelines how we work with AI and how we ask contributors to work with it. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document sets up guidelines how we work with AI and how we ask contributors to work with it. 
```

> This document will set up guidelines how we work with AI and how we ask contributors to work with it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document defines guidelines regarding how we work with AI and how we ask contributors to work with it. 
```

This is done to protect OpenCloud, especially with regards to the following points: 

> 1. **Code Quality**: OpenCloud has a strong focus on code quality as we know that dealing with users data comes with a great responsibility for data security. All contributions have to put that first.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Code Quality**: OpenCloud has a strong focus on code quality as we know that dealing with user data comes with a great responsibility for data security. All contributions have to put that first.
```

> 2. **Focus**: OpenCloud serves a certain purpose which is defined very carefully by product managenment. All contributions have to align with that roadmap.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. **Focus**: OpenCloud serves a certain purpose which is defined very carefully by product management. All contributions have to align with that roadmap.
```

> 2. **Focus**: OpenCloud serves a certain purpose which is defined very carefully by product managenment. All contributions have to align with that roadmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Focus**: OpenCloud serves a specific purpose which is defined very carefully by product managenment. All contributions have to align with that roadmap.
```

"specific" better hints at "well-defined", whereas "certain" is rather vague

3. **Maintainability**: All contributions must be as "consumable" as ever possible since all contributions will be reviewed. Also, code that is written today needs to be maintained tomorrow.   
5. **Human centric**: The most valuable resource is the time of human maintainers. That must be used carefully.

These points can be summarized in a fundamental principle for OpenCloud in relation to AI:

> >*OpenCloud is a project driven by responsible humans. We take a positive view on using AI as a tool to speed up and refine work. However, we expect that human work habits and processes are always  respected. For every contribution a person is held accountable.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>*OpenCloud is a project driven by responsible humans. We take a positive view on using AI as a tool to speed up and refine work. However, we expect that human work habits and processes are always respected. For every contribution a person is held accountable.*
```

> >*OpenCloud is a project driven by responsible humans. We take a positive view on using AI as a tool to speed up and refine work. However, we expect that human work habits and processes are always  respected. For every contribution a person is held accountable.*

Reviewer 4: > We take a positive view on using AI as a tool

Hm, is it really just yet another tool for us? Like a new compiler or IDE? And only positive? From our discussions I remember that we're also having concerns around the ethics and economics around the use of AI. Should we at least mention that?

Author: Good point. I rephrased this a a little bit stronger.

> Requirements are further specified below. Contributions that do not comply with this requirements will be rejected without further discussion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Requirements are further specified below. Contributions that do not comply with these requirements will be rejected without further discussion.
```

## Fit to the Project

> Before submitting a PR to any repository of OpenCloud, think about it's size and fit to the project. That is a major factor on how careful the PR needs to be prepared and how maintainer look at it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before submitting a PR to any repository of OpenCloud, think about its size and fit to the project. That is a major factor on how careful the PR needs to be prepared and how maintainers look at it.
```

### Bug Fixes
Bug fixes in form of "one-liners", typo fixes, fixes to translations and such are always very appreciated. Never think "that is too trivial to submit", it is not.

### Refactorings

> Bigger changes that fix misbehaviour, refactor parts of the codebase are also appreciated, but be careful. Have tests and keep changes small. Possibly talk before submitting what the maintainers think of your idea.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Bigger changes that fix misbehaviour, refactor parts of the codebase are also appreciated, but be careful. Have tests and keep changes small. Possibly ask before submitting what the maintainers think of your idea.
```

### Feature Additions

> Yes, we love it, but we also apply the rules here, as we take the responsibility to maintain code that we include into the project. Try to structure the changes you plan into multiple steps to make it easier to overlook. Try to consider alternatives and document your decisions (ADR).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes, we love it, but we also apply the rules here, as we take the responsibility to maintain code that we include into the project. Try to structure the changes you plan into multiple steps to make it easier to understand and review. Try to consider alternatives and document your decisions (ADR).
```

Most important: make sure to talk before you invest work and tokens. There is a chance that we will not take your contribution even if it is formally great because it does not fit the roadmap.

### "Scratch your itch"
"Scratching your own itch" and pushing the results upstream is in general a great motivation to contribute to open source projects. OpenCloud supports that idea. 
However, we have to keep the main direction of the project in mind, so we can not accept every "special purpose" feature.

> Make sure to find a ballance between functions that are good for everybody and your own needs. You will have to keep private patches for some of your additions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Make sure to find a balance between functions that are good for everybody and your own needs. You will have to keep private patches for some of your additions.
```

> Make sure to find a ballance between functions that are good for everybody and your own needs. You will have to keep private patches for some of your additions.

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth adding a sentence about the [web-extension framework](https://docs.opencloud.eu/docs/dev/web/extension-system/) as a way to add functionality without necessarily committing all of it upstream?

Author: done

## Pull Requests

> Contributions to all parts of the project are very appreciated. To submit a contribution via Github Pull Requests,  the following points need to be considered:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Contributions to all parts of the project are very appreciated. To submit a contribution via GitHub Pull Requests, the following points need to be considered:
```

> Contributions to all parts of the project are very appreciated. To submit a contribution via Github Pull Requests,  the following points need to be considered:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Contributions to any part of the project are highly appreciated. To submit a contribution via Github Pull Requests,  the following points need to be considered:
```

> 1. YOU are responsible for what you submit, not your agent. Make sure you completely understand what you submit. Be able to answer questions. Be open about your way to use AI. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. YOU are responsible for what you submit, not your agent. Make sure you completely understand what you submit. Be able to answer questions. Be open about the way you use AI. 
```

> 2. Keep PRs short. The shorter the better, as that is easier for humans. Split code contributions to multiple PRs. Invest time in finding logical portions of bigger contributions and reference the PRs accordingly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Keep PRs short. The shorter the better, as that is easier for humans. Split code contributions to multiple PRs (e.g. separate refactors from changes introducing new features). Invest time in finding logical portions of bigger contributions and reference the PRs accordingly.
```

3. Authorship is for humans, not tools. Code assistants and such should not be described in commits using tags like "Co-authored-by" or similar. Nor must they be listed as primary author. 

> 4. To be sensitive about others time, keep descriptions short and concise. Another person should understand your idea within tem seconds. Consider splitting your comments to a summary on top and detailed description below. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. To be sensitive about others time, keep descriptions short and concise. Another person should understand your idea within ten seconds. Consider splitting your comments to a summary on top and detailed description below. 
```

> 4. To be sensitive about others time, keep descriptions short and concise. Another person should understand your idea within tem seconds. Consider splitting your comments to a summary on top and detailed description below. 

Reviewer 5: From my experience with agent generated PRs this is actually what I struggle most with besides the amount and quality of code itself. There's something about the way the agents often write the PR description that makes it really hard for me to parse and understand. They tend to be too long and verbose, mix important and much less relevant things, and just have a style that makes it hard for my brain to follow.
I'm not sure how to phrase it better or what kind of rule to apply here however, to be honest. The "keep it short and concise" kinda covers it already but I still feel like it might be a bit too weak. Maybe explicitly demanding a human-centric form and style would do the trick?

> 4. To be sensitive about others time, keep descriptions short and concise. Another person should understand your idea within tem seconds. Consider splitting your comments to a summary on top and detailed description below. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. To be sensitive about others time. AI tend to generate long and very verbose PR descriptions, that are often not to the point. It is rarely a good idea to just submit that unedited. Ideally the descriptions short and concise and show you own understanding of the submission. Another person should understand your idea instantly. Consider splitting your comments to a summary on top and detailed description below. 
```

5. Check your contribution: Review your AI generated PR carefully before submitting it. Abstain from copy & paste. It is YOU who submits it, not an AI. Maintain your contributor reputation.

> 6. Add useful comments, tests and documentation additions to your contribution. AI is a great  help for that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Add useful comments, tests and documentation additions to your contribution. AI is a great help for that.
```

> 6. Add useful comments, tests and documentation additions to your contribution. AI is a great  help for that.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. Add useful comments, tests and documentation additions to your contribution. AI can be a great  help for that.
```

These rules are mostly soft. But maintainership considers to put hard limits behind some of them in the CI which results in automatic decline of PRs in Github.

## Human interaction

> OpenCloud is and will be a human driven project. Keep that in mind with every contribution and interaction. Beside a friendly and patient attitude, a human friendly style of communication and working is expected.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenCloud is and will be a human driven project. Keep that in mind with every contribution and interaction. Besides a friendly and patient attitude, a human friendly style of communication and working is expected.
```
